---
layout: post
title: Scotland Cycle
excerpt: Here's a writeup of my cycle trip around Scotland.
---

{% include leaflet-head.html %}

Here's a map with routes and photos on it. You can also <a href="https://photos.app.goo.gl/c866Na7frtzivPJo7" target="_blank">view the photos on Google Photos</a>, or <a href="/posts/scotland-cycle-map" target="_blank">open a full screen map in a new tab</a>.

<div id="map" style="height: 600px; width: 100%"></div>
<script src="/assets/scripts/scotlandmap.js"></script>

## Introduction
I had 6 weeks off between jobs. I spent the first week going to interviews, the second week deciding which job offer to accept and getting the contract sorted, weeks 3-5 cycling around Scotland, and week 6 coaching orienteering to 16 year olds in Scotland. This is a write up of my cycle trip from Monday 16 July to Friday 3rd August 2018.

I don't claim for this to be interesting to read - it's just a record of what I did!

## Day 1
I was staying with my parents, and got up early and cycled to Rugby for the 6.45am train. My sister had showed me how to make oat and banana cereal bar type things for breakfast, so I have enough for about a week worth of breakfasts! I did a puzzle book on the train (Hangjie). The train got to just outside Glasgow on time, but then got delayed half an hour waiting for a platform, which means refund! In Glasgow a Scottish man who I couldn't understand very well watched my bike whilst I bought water in Sainsbury's. Then I bought a pasty from a Scottish woman who I could understand, except that she spoke really quickly so I actually couldn't understand. Then I got the train to Balloch. In Balloch I tried to buy gas but couldn't find any. I cycled to Tarbet and found a campsite which sold gas on the way. I thought Tarbet would have a food shop, since it has a train station, but it didn't. But somebody told me the next village (Arrochar) has a shop, which it did. Back in Tarbet I got the boat across the Loch Lomond to Inversnaid. There was commentary with many stupid jokes. It's the largest freshwater body by area in the UK and 3rd deepest loch. I then discovered wild camping in the Trossachs national park is banned, so I kept cycling to a campsite. By chance I ended up at the only campsite run by the national park itself (not for profit). They said that wild camping is only banned near the roads (about 4% of the park), so thank drunken groups don't come and spoil the environment. He said what I'm doing would have been fine, and if a ranger came they'd just sell me a £3 permit instead of fining me. The campsite is very basic and spread out, I am in my own little clearing in the forest! And I hired a fire pit (metal bowl) to make fire in so I have a fire! Sadly no sausages though. I made pasta with baked beans and tinned peas! There are midges but not too many and the fire helps keep them away. My solar panel did well at recharging my watch so I can see where I've been this trip (useless for my phone though).

## Day 2
I slept for about 11 hours last night! Although I kept waking up because I was too cold. There was a family from the Netherlands camping nearby, they were asking me about midges. I told them Skye is worse than here. The midges actually aren't bad. I found 4 massive red ticks on the outside of my tent this morning, lucky they didn't work out how to get inside! I cycled for about half an hour then had some oat-banana things for breakfast by Loch Katrine. It was about 25km to get to the other end of it. It rained for about 5 minutes but the rest of the day was really nice. At the end of the loch, I saw a sign saying "Ben Venue path" so I decided to climb it (727m). Very nice views! Quite a few other walkers there too. I brought the gas with me and made pasta and lentil soup mixed together. Some walkers asked if they could order a cappuccino but sadly I didn't have the ingredients. I then continured along Cycle Route 7 to Callander, the first shops I'd seen for a couple of days! I eventually found one selling postcards after about 8 tries. I stocked up on food (including fresh bakery) and continued north to Strathyre. All the cycling today has been either traffic-free, or with very few cars. Some paths were quite bumpy and gravelly, but my arm seemed to manage OK (I broke it mid-April). I met two cyclists going the other way who said they were going "not far - just Inverness to Glasgow". They had hardly any stuff, they were staying in bivvy bags, my bags are massive compared to theirs. I decided to go just off the cycle route to Loch Voil to camp this evening. Everywhere along the waterside said "private" or "no camping" until after about 5k I got to one of the national park's designated wild camping spots. I don't have a permit but I guess it's fine. I had a wash in the lake and made dinner (pasta with broccoli). It's nice in the tent, all you can hear is the waves and distant voices of some other campers. My gaffer tape came in useful for two things today - to repair the water bottle holder on my bike, and a tent pole which was starting to snap.

## Day 3
I woke up with the light at 5.30am and couldn't sleep so I got up and started cycling just before 7am. It was pretty cold early in the morning! Again the cycle path was brilliant! Through Glen Ogle it was a disused railway line along the side of the valley with great views, especially of Loch Earn. I reached Killin just before 9 and bought food, and finally managed to buy a spork! Previously I'd bought a set of 4 cheap metal spoons, thrown 3 in the bin, and now I slightly regretfully threw away the fourth one too. I met a group of about 15 Czech cyclists there, who were surprised that I could speak Czech. They were travelling by coach and doing day cycles each day. It turned out we were going the same way! It also turned out they weren't that fast since most of them walked up the steep hill, even though they didn't have any luggage! The steep hill led up to the car park for Ben Lawers, where I stopped, and the Czech people caught up and carried onwards. I walked up ben Lawers (1214m). I met a Canadian couple at the top who walked very fast and we told each other about our holidays. Back at the bottom I kept cycling up, over the pass, then a long and very fun downhill for about 8k to Bridge of Baigie. Shortly after I found a hedge with more raspberries, perfectly ripe, than I have ever seen. I ate as many as I could and then collected a container full of them too. I was hoping for a shop so I could buy something to make them into a camping crumble, but there were none so I settled for buying a piece of shortbread in a cafe and taking it with me. Outside the cafe I met a group of American cyclists cycling East to West across Scotland. I recommended the raspberry picking. There was one more steep hill north out of Keltneyburn, bringing today over 1000m of climb. I asked a nice family staying in a holiday cabin to refill my water, because the campsite where I had hoped to refill seemed to be static caravans only with no outdoor water supply. I'm now camped by a small fishing lake with sunshine. A seagull, probably worried about her nest, kept flying at me whilst I was washing in the Lake, but never came closer than about 10m. I made my crumble by boiling the raspberries and crumbling the shortbread over the top, probably the best camping food I've ever had!

## Day 4
Today was a long day. I woke up too cold again, but managed to fall asleep. I'm wondering whether to buy a better sleeping bag. The whole day was sunny! My mat keeps deflating in the night, so this morning I put it in the lake to try to find the hole by looking for bubbles, which was a success, and my bike puncture repair kit was also a success in fixing it. I then cycled about 2k to the Schiehallion car park and climbed the mountain (1083m). There were great views and I think you could see Ben Nevis and Cairngorm in the distance, although I wasn't sure. I met a guy from Birmingham (I think he said aged 62, but he was quite fit) who is climbing all the munros. He has just one to go, Mount Keen near Aberdeen. We walked down together, he was quite interesting to talk to! And he said it's a good sign that my partner let me go to Scotland for a month on my own ;) I had lentil soup back at the car park, then it was about 30k to reach Pitlochry before I got too thirsty because I had no water again. On the border between Perthshire and Stirlingshire, the signs were amusing: Perth said "Welcome to the heart of Scotland" while in the other direction, Stirling said "Welcome to Scotland's heart". Everybody wants to be the heart of Scotland I guess! I stayed in Pitlochry for a while and had lunch from co-op, including strawberries, rolls and homous. Then it was another 50k to Perth. The roads were nice, but the mountains turned into small hills and eventually I reached the centre of Perth, bought food, and went to search for somewhere to camp - less easy now I'm not in the wilderness. I eventually settled for an unusual spot underneath a huge motorway bridge (M90) next to the river. The bridge might be useful though, since it's meant to rain tonight.

##  Day 5
Today, as predicted, I woke up in the rain, and the motorway bridge provided reasonable shelter though. I made a porridge pot with banana for breakfast and packed up. I think the vegetation below the bridge was dead due to drought, not poisonous road pollution, which is good. James arrived in his car at about 9.30 and we put the bike in the car and drove to Hallglen for orienteering training. There was route choice, map memory, and a 3k line course around some complicated housing estates (a bit like North Cambridge). The line course was very intense concentration. We finished by lunchtime so hung around and talked for a bit. We then went to a campsite, then walkied into Falkirk (about 1.5 hours each way), stopping at a pub for dinner on the way back. We saw the Falkirk Wheel which lifts boats from one canal to another by rotating around, and we saw it moving. It feels like locks would be more practical, but at least it's a good tourist attraction. In Falkirk we saw Callander house, an old building. In the evening we drove to an evening talk by Yannick Michels (a top sprint orienteer from Belgium). He was 5th at the WOC sprint in Scotland 2015.j He is really fast at 5k and 10k and wants to make it known in the athletics world that he also does orienteering, to stop everybody thinking it's not a real sport. Then we came back to the campsite and I had my first shower (as opposed to swim in a lake) since Sunday.

## Day 6
Today there were two sprint races. In the morning we made porridge at the campsite, then drove about 10 minutes to the races. Assembly was in a football pavilion and there weren't enough toilets. The orienteering was really good though. Mostly housing estates with a bit in a field with long grass at the end. My legs got itchy because I was wearing shorts, but I discovered that pouring water on my legs is very effective at stopping the itchiness. In both races I made one mistake of about 20s, plus some smaller ones. James beat me both times, he runs very fast! It was possibly harder competition than the British Champs with all the foreign people - I think I was about 17th in both races. Between the races we bought lunch in Sainsbury's and then had a sleep on the sports hall floor. After the races we did Maze-O, which James decided was intense enough to warrant a warm down, so he went for another short jog. Then we walked to the town centre (about 15 mins) and had Indian food there. The naan bread was HUGE and I couldn't finish it! Then we walked back for the evening talk by Kris Jones about how he approaches sprint orienteering. He thinks being a very good 3k-5k runner is important, and route choice is important. Then we came back to the campsite for the "Ceilidh" although it was more playing a few songs on the guitar (and bagpipes) and singing, and then chatting. There was the campsite owner, another woman who lives in a caravan, us two, and a family from Aberdeen who were also camping. The owner had invited the whole campsite, so it appeared not many people wanted to be sociable! He said it was mostly English and German people on the site at the moment so that's why nobody came. Apparently they sometimes have 30 or more people there, and in winter they have a fire outside as well. The owner also paints and sells his paintings online. He said we were clever because we studied at Cambridge, but I think he is clever for being able to run a campsite, paint, socialise with the campers, train a sheep dog, and farm animals!

## Day 7
This morning was the last sprint race in Grangemouth. I managed to do the same as the previous two races and make one 20s mistake, but not too bad, and running fast feels nice. James was 10th again! I cycled to the race and James drove (about 12k) and I saw the Kelpies on the way, it's cool how the canal goes right between them. I wanted to find a postcard with factories and smoke to represent what Grangemouth is actually like, but strangely they don't make postcards like that. After the race we had hot dogs for lunch (athlete's diet) and watched the prizegiving. Then James returned to Aberdeen and I was back on my own to continue with the cycle trip. I cycled to Polmont and caught the train to Ardrossan. Me and another guy were sitting diagonally opposite each other and some drunk Scottish girl decided to join us at the table. She asked if we had girlfriends and he didn't, so she kept trying to touch time inappropriately, apparently I was safe though because I have a girlfriend. Luckily she was only there for about 10 minutes before her stop so then she left us in peace. I had no idea when the boats to the island of Arran left, but I was lucky to arrive just before the 6pm boat. It's really cheap, about £3.50 for a 1 hour boat crossing to the island. I met another cyclist waiting for the boat who is a geography teacher, but used to be an outdoor instructor and lived on Arran for 2.5 years, so we had hot chocolate together and he told me loads of helpful tourist information about it whilst we were on the boat. He was coming for 2 weeks in his summer break to instruct on a summer camp. We also saw some porpoises. He cycled with me to a very basic campsite (just toilets and cold water) and then we said bye. There were thousands of flying ants on the road by the campsite! It's meant to rain in the morning so I might have an extra long lie-in.

## Day 8
I got very wet today, as did some of my stuff. This morning was actually quite nice, I left the tent at the campsite in Glen Rosa and cycled 10k to Lamlash, where I got the boat to Holy Island. The boat was really small, only for about 10 people. On the island we were welcomed by one of the volunteers who told us a bit about the island - it is owned by a Buddhist monastery. Then I walked along the coast to the other end of the island and back along the ridge, it's about 300m high. You could see rain on the main island a lot, but it didn't rain on Holy Island! One of the locals said it's quite a common thing. When I finished walking I went to the "boathouse" where the volunteer offered me a cup of tea - she used to work for Sustrans (the cycle charity) for 3 years in London. She said the cycle routes in Scotland get tonnes more funding than England because it encourages tourism. I got the boat back to the "mainland" where it was raining, so I had a scone in a tea shop. 30 minutes later it was still rainng, so I just cycled back to my tent in the rain. At the campsite a French couple had got their car stuck, but the farmer towed them out. I packed up my tent in the rain and started cycling to Lochranza at the north end of the island. This took about 1.5 hours and it was still raining quite a lot. Luckily there was one pub there, so I treated myself to dinner in it, but kept my target of not staying in a hostel by camping afterwards! They gave me a towel to dry myself with which was nice. I did some logic puzzles, and had a short conversation with a woman who was a philosophy researcher but is now an entrepreneur (from Arizona). About 2 hours later the rain stopped, and now I'm camping by the sea next to the ferry terminal. The tent is soaked because the inside got wet when I packed it away. I also confirmed that one of my panniers is not waterproof. And lots of midges. However, it should be nice for the next few days!

## Day 9
Such a contrast - moonlit clear sky tonight compared to the rain yesterday! I was camping in Lochranza last night right next to the ferry terminal, so I left my tent up as long as possible before the 9.30am boat in the hope it would dry a bit, and it did! I had porridge with dried mango and nuts in it for breakfast. I tied the remaining very wet things to the outside of my panniers so they could dry during the day (basically the clothes and shoes I cycled in yesterday).j I got the boat along with a group of about 25 cyclists who were on an organised tour from Penrith to Durness, staying in hotels and with luggage in a van - in fact the van even provided snack stops along the way! Shortly after leaving the ferry I noticed my wet shoes had fallen off - I cycled back and found them about 1k back, somebody had nicely balanced them on a fence to make them obvious. I also talked to a local woman on the boat who was a teacher and liked walking, I can't remember anything else interesting though. So I cycled to Torbert next, about 20k, caught the big group at one of their stops, and actually they only went a tiny bit faster than me. In Tarbert I bought food supplies and had a quick look around the castle ruins. Then I turned back to Kilberry on a coastal but very hilly road! I met a quite old cyclist going the other way who tried to be helpful giving directions, but I didn't need any and couldn't remember what he was saying anyway. Near Kilberry were some ancient stones, and a campsite in a really nice location where I bought an ice cream. I continued to Achahoish, this bit was really nice, by the sea, some beaches, sunny, wind behind! I then decided to leave the cycle route and try going round the next peninsula to Kilmory. I asked at somebody's house to fill up water and went. My map showed the road didn't go round the peninsula and it was signed dead-end, but there was a small track joining the roads marked "private", but I went there anyway and it was fine. I'm now camping in Kilmory Bay on a patch of short grass right by the beach, with a great view out to the sea and the island of Jura. I arrived at about 5 when the sun was still fairly strong, so I laid out most of my stuff to dry properly! Then I cooked dinner (pasta + green beans, gas is running out again oh no). Then I planned to go for a walk, but stopped after about 100m and spent 2 hours digging a trench and building a wall in the sand to divert a stream coming down the beach! Then there was an amazing sunset and moonrise to end the day.

## Day 10
It was very sunny today. I had porridge with banana, and packed away. The stream diversion project from yesterday was still diverted in the morning and some nice meanders had formed. Someone said yesterday I needed to go to Lochgilphead to buy food since there were no shops between there and Oban. However, that was a 20k diversion to go there, so I tried alternatives. After about 5k there was a campsite by Castle Sween where I bought some snacks. Then I diverted 4k to Crinan, which was a nice harbour village - the boat shop didn't sell gas though. I had no lunch food so had a roll in a cafe. There I briefly met a couple from Yorkshire who were here in their campervan, but had bikes and kayaks with them for day trips. Then I also met a couple from Northern Ireland who had a yacht and were sailing around the islands. I cycled back along a canal cycle path - a Canadian artist was selling his work there, he lives there and his house (or shed) is very unusually decorated on the outside. I then rejoined the cycle route and it was dead flat for about 10k, passing some bronze age monuments and tombs. I then reached Kilmartin, where there was a pub, hotel, cafe, and museum, but the shop had closed down! I bought some crisps and nuts in the pub as emergency food. My gas was nearly empty so I thought I should try cooking there, where I could go to the pub for dinner if it ran out, instead of the middle of nowhere. So I cooked pasta at the side of the road. Just as it started boiling, the gas ran out, but I was surprised because I just left it to soak in the hot water for 10 minutes and it cooked well! I added cold baked beans and put it in my box for later. The next 40k were supposedly "remote" but then there was a village shop in Dalavich half way along, so all the food search was for nothing! This road followed the side of Loch Awe, however it was still super hilly (700m climb in 40k), but at least the wind was behind and the road was well-surfaced because of forestry logging traffic. I was planning to camp somewhere around Kilchrenan, but the bottom bracket on my bike started to go! My knee felt ok so I carried on to Taynuilt where there is a train station (and a shop in fact which even sold gas!). I also wanted to climb Ben Cruachan, but I'll need to get my bike fixed in Oban tomorrow morning before the 1330 boat to the Outer Hebrides. So I went to Taynuilt train station, where I met two cyclists doing Route 78 (Inverness to Campbelltown) a couple of days at a time, in sections. I also ate my cold pasta and beans. I then caught the train about 15k in the wrong direction from Oban and cycled 400m climb up to Cruachan reservoir. The bike finally gave up completely with 500m to go so I walked with the bike the last bit. It's downhill all the way to the station in the morning though so it'll be fine. Now I'm camped by the reservoir dam somewhere windy to keep midges away! I had a nice shower in a stream. The sun is behind the mountain now but I'm watching the shadow move upwards on the other side, the view is great here over Loch Awe and lots of other mountains.

## Day 11
I got up at 5am today and ran up Ben Cruachan. The sun was just starting to shine on the peak as I started running. It was very rocky, but there were a few bits of nice grassy running too. I met one other person, who was as surprised as I was to see another person up there at this time - he'd camped near the top overnight. It took almost two hours to run around the 10.8k horseshoe because of the rockiness, and when I got back I didn't have long to pack up to catch the first train to Oban. I couldn't find the bag for my tent so just shoved it into a dry bag, thinking the tent bag must have blown away. Making the train was fine, and the nice downhill meant I didn't need to pedal so the bike was fine. I got to Oban at about 9am and had to wait until 10 for the bike shop to open. The guy in the shop wasn't very helpful, he said he was very busy, and that the broken bottom bracket was probably the end of the bike and it would be better for me to buy a new one. I didn't really believe him (it turned out rightly so), but I hired a mountain bike for a day whilst I considered what to do next. I'd already bought my ferry ticket to the Outer Hebrides but luckily they refunded it for me when I asked. I did quite a short cycle, catching the short boat to the island of Kerrera, and cycled around some fun tracks. I stopped for a scone at a teashop. Then I sat in the sun for about 1.5 hours and slept on a bench for a bit, before getting the boat back and returning the bike. I had decided to carry on with the trip as best I could and try to get the bike fixed, so I caught a 4 hour train to Fort William to try the bike shop there. If they can't fix it I might try going to Eigg/Rum/Canna/Muck on foot. During the train journey, at the stations on the moors loads of midges came in when the train stopped and the doors opened. I made baguettes with salmon, homous and lettuce in for my lunch tomorrow whilst on the train. I was quite tired when the train arrived in Fort William at 10pm, so I just camped on some grass at the edge of the Lidl car park! Also has the advantages that the midges won't be too bad in an urban setting. I found the tent bag wrapped up inside the tent, which was a relief. The plan is to climb Ben Nevis in the morning.

## Day 12
I only got woken up twice in the night - first by some drunk people playing music in the Lidl car park, then by the Lidl delivery lorry arriving early in the morning. I got up just after 6 and packed away. I decided I could waive my not-paying-for-toilets principle since I had camped for free, so paid 20p to use the ones at the station. I had a shave there too, so good value. Then I found somewhere to hide my bags and walked to the Ben Nevis car park (Glen Nevis visitor centre). It was still sunny at this point (8am) and I was hoping I wouldn't get burnt. The sign said 4 hours to the top, but it took 1 hour 50 minutes. The path was really easy to walk on. Sadly by the time I got there, everything above about 1100m was in cloud. It was quite chilly and windy at the top. I wanted to do a circuit and come down the other way, but I decided trying to navigate on my own in the mist wasn't the best idea, so I went back the same way. Then it started raining for about 20 minutes, by which time I was below the mist, still good views. Back at the car park the visitor centre had opened so I had a look around, apparently the temperature at the top is 9 degrees cooler than in the valley on average. And 100 years ago or something a meteorology enthusiast walked up there every day during the summer to take readings! I walked back to my bike, which happened to be where the West Highland Way finished (a 100 mile hike) and took a photo for a couple who had just finished walking it. Then I brought my bike to the bike shop, by this time it was about 12.00. They were much more helpful than the guy in Oban, and even though they were busy they squeezed it in since it was quite a short job. Meanwhile I went to look around Fort William. Most of the original Fort got destroyed firstly by the Victorians building a railway for an aluminium factory, then in the 1970s to build more railways and a new road. I went to a cafe because it started raining again, and had soup and apple pie and charged my phone. I also bought a small amount of very expensive, but interestingly flavoured, fudge. And I enjoyed looking around the outdoor shops, there are loads of them and they have really good offers, if I wasn't on a cycling trip it would be a great place to buy some decent outdoor equipment. I returned to the bike shop at 5.30pm to find that they had indeed fixed by bike! I gave them quite a generous tip for doing it so quickly. This means I should still have time to go to the Outer Hebrides. It's 4 hours on the train back to Oban and £27, but also 4 hours by bike and £0, since the train takes such a convoluted route. I cycled the first 30k this evening and am in a real campsite because I wanted to have a shower, I felt so sticky last night without one! The campsite owners said the bike shop in Oban had a bad reputation, so I guess I was just unlucky! Just after I finished cooking dinner it started raining so I went into the tent. It's still raining and I want to go and have a shower, but don't want to go through the rain to get to them, kind of ironic.

## Day 13
It rained most of the night, and unfortunately a little corner of my nice waterproof groundsheet was sticking out, so water got in from underneath. It wasn't too bad though, most stuff is in dry bags and my sleeping bag is dry. I cycled the rest of the way to Oban (about 50k). I'm impressed by how much special cycle path they have, it must have cost a lot to build! There were some good patches of raspberries and wild strawberries along the way. There were light showers but I managed to shelter under trees and wait. In Oban I bought food in Lidl and Tesco, and a new toothbrush, my teeth are hurting and I'm not sure why [it later turned out my wisdom teeth are making my back teeth rot, and will need taking out]. Then I went to catch the boat to Castlebay on Barra, the southernmost part of the Outer Hebrides, which left at 1.30pm. There were at least 10 or 15 other bikes all loaded up with luggage too. The boat took 5 hours. I met a couple who were cycling up the western isles for their honeymoon, and a primary teacher from Glasgow who was visiting a friend on Barra. I also slept for a while. I watched a girl trying to charge her phone, the sockets were high up near the ceiling and she eventually managed to leave her phone dangling in mid-air on the end of the wire to charge. As soon as she'd gone to sit down, another girl came up, plugged her own phone into the adjacent socket, and left her phone on top of the sockets where it sat quite happily - much easier. A sign said the boat uses about one car-tank of fuel to travel 0.5 miles. When we got off the boat it was raining. I got a cycling leaflet from tourist information, and they also warned me that it would be very windy this evening and recommended a place where I could camp on a patch of grass by the Castlebay village church, sheltered by a stone wall. I set up in the rain and managed to cook dinner inside the tiny porch area - I think my gas will last much longer now that I understand "simmer for 10 minutes" is the same as "bring to the boil, then turn off and leave to soak for 15 minutes", it's very effective. By the time I'd eaten the rain had stopped and some blue sky was appearing. The Hebridean Way is a cycle route along the length of the Outer Hebrides. It starts at the southernmost point in Vatersay, which is about 10k south of Castlebay where I was. So I did a triathlon by cycling to Vatersay (enjoying not having so much weight on my bike), then ran about another 1k to the southernmost tip of Vatersay, and then swam about 1m on "south beach" - a beach on the south coast with really nice white soft sand. I then cycled back to the tent with a strong tailwind. I discovered a co-op in Castlebay with plenty of fresh things, making it feel slightly less remote, although seeing as Castlebay is the "capital" of the isle of Barra, it still has absolutely no phone signal. Also enjoying the lack of midges, probably because it's so windy.

## Day 14
Last night was very wet and very windy. Luckily the wall protected me and my tent was fine. Other campers I talked to later in the day said their tents had been flattened or soaked. The locals said that it was "just a bit of wind", nothing compared to what they get in winter. I got up late waiting for the rain to stop, which was a good choice because it meant that the wind dried my tent quite nicely. I met two girls from Glasgow who were hitchhiking/bussing around. Apparently there was a "big" party in Castlebay last night which was open to everybody. I cycled about 20k across Barra to the ferry to Eriskay. Planes land on the beach here, although I didn't see any. Just before the ferry terminal I saw two cyclists stopped at the side of the road, and I asked if they wanted to borrow any tools. One had a snapped chain, which I couldn't help with, so I wished them good luck and carried on. It was 3 hours until the next boat, so I charged my phone and brought my bike into the little ferry terminal waiting room and swapped the front and back tyres over. The back tyre was very worn and I was worried it might not survive the rest of the trip. In the process I managed to puncture one of the inner tubes, but I put a new tube in and repaired the punctured one. I met a French teacher from Bristol who was on a car tour, also waiting for the boat. The honeymoon cyclists from yesterday also turned up. The sun came out as the boat arrived and the rest of the day was really nice with a sunset too! On the boat I met the cyclists with the broken chain again, the bike was now fixed. One of the locals had invited them into their house, given them lunch, and it turned out the local's son was the postman for the island. The postman phoned his friend who fixed bikes, who drove over and fixed the chain - very friendly! When the boat arrived on Eriskay it was about 4.30pm and I hadn't done much cycling, so I got going. After about an hour I caught up with the guys-with-the-fixed-chain again and they said where they were planning too camp, just at the south end of North Uist. I was planning a similar distance so we said we might see each other at the campsite, and that I could share their chilli con carne if we met. They're both primary teachers from Nottingham (teacher theme going on here...). The cycling was much easier than other places, it was almost flat and the strong tail wind helped! It's a shame the road is inland and not on the coast. I wanted to see an otter but haven't yet. We saw loads of seals on the rocks from the boat though. I stopped at a garage along the way to pump my tyres back up properly solidly. The mountain on South Uist (Ben Mhor) looked nice to climb but I was quite enjoying cycling in the sun so carried on! I eventually reached North Uist, the 5th island today (others are joined by causeways, that's why there was only one ferry), and stopped at a campsite near Carinish. 92k today but it didn't feel too bad. The campsite has an indoor kitchen for use by campers which is nice! There were some men from Yorkshire cooking fresh lobster there when I arrived, which smelt very good. I haven't seen the other cyclists so maybe they stopped earlier.

## Day 15
This morning I ate three "portions" of porridge for breakfast, packed up, and sat doing puzzles in the sheltered kitchen until most of the rain had passed. I set off at 11.30 and for a short time fooled myself into thinking I could make the next boat at 13.30. I thought it was about 30k to the boat but it was more like 50k. Once I gave up on that boat and decided to go for the next one at 17.20 it was more relaxed and fun :p I cycled around the west coast North Uist which was nice, although a bit annoying having to stop for cars all the time in passing places because it was single track. I could see showers out at sea and hoped they weren't going to get me - I got a bit of rain but nothing too heavy! I detoured up a hill at the west end of the island to a St. Kilda viewing point. ST. Kilda is the westernmost bit of the UK (I think). It was quite hazy but you could just make out the outline of the island 41 miles away. I then carried on to the ferry, past some impressive beaches and sand flats, onto the little island of Berneray (via another causeway). I still had about 1.5 hours until the boat so I left my bike and went for a walk along the coast. The information centre was already shut, but there was a shop with the FORECASTING STONE outside, which I was very excited to see having seen photos of it on postcards in many shops along the way. I bought couscous and beans there for dinner. The couscous claimed to be for four people, but I ate all of it as one meal. When I got back to the ferry it was nearly time to board, and the honeymoon cyclists were there, as well as a few others I had seen before. The Nottingham teachers weren't there though. The boat takes a really wiggly route across, there was a marine map on the wall. It's quite impressive that it gets across at all, there are rocks just below the surface everywhere and there's a narrow passage deep enough for the boat winding between them. On the other side, several of the cyclists were going to a seafood pub which sounded nice, but I carried on around the west coast of Harris. I wanted to see seals on the crossing but there weren't any! It was dry and sunny by this point. Just after Northton village I overtook a local man (quite old) going for a cycle. I asked if there was a path up the hill and he said yes, and he'd walk the first bit with me. He's called Gordon, he worked in the distilleries near Ayr but was made redundant and took the opportunity to move here. He had throat cancer a year ago which got cured, and he tries to stay healthy with a bit of exercise. He soon turned back from the walk and I continued to the top (281m) where the views over the island were great. The "path" petered out after about 100m though, so most of the way was just across the moorland. Back at my bike I continued to Horgabost where I camped. It turns out that I camped right next to the Carcus family, who are also orienteers! The sunset was at 21.50 so I cycled back a few kilometres for a clear view of the horizon over the sea. It was amazing with the sun setting right over the water. You have to pay for showers at this campsite, but somebody left some credit in the meter so I was quick and got 3 minutes of hot water.

## Day 16
I got up at 7 and started cycling at 8 today in an attempt to avoid the rain forecast later on. It took about an hour to get across the moor to Tarbert, where I had a look around tourist information and bought food for lunch. The road had been wet overnight and the wind was drying it, and in some places it seemed that the height of the white lines painted in the middle of the road affected how the wind was blowing, which made stripes of wetter and drier sections across the whole width of the road. I was wondering whether to wait in Tarbert until after the rain - but lucky I didn't because the rain started at about 12 and it rained for the rest of the day! It was really windy (60kph) and I was considering climbing An Cliseam, the highest point on the Outer Hebrides (799m). As a last minute decision whilst cycling past, I glanced up and decided I couldn't miss going up there whilst I was here, so ran up in the hope I'd make it before the rain arrived. It was super windy near the top, I had to crouch and hold onto rocks with my hands to not be blown over! The views from the top were brilliant and you could see the rain approaching out at sea. The rain just started when I was halfway down, and with the wind it hurt a fair amount when it hit my face. When I got back to the road, a father and son from Yorkshire were just starting the walk despite the wind, rain, and the peak now being in mist. They were hoping the rain would pass, but it didn't so I'm not sure if they still made it or not. I cycled another hour with only a few specks of rain and a roaring tailwind which I could feel on my back even when going quite fast. I paused for lunch in a bus shelter just as the proper rain caught up with me. Whilst I was there the two teachers from Nottingham reappeared and came past - they were very wet and didn't want to stop because they wouldn't want to start again. I stayed in the shelter for about an hour, by which time it seemed clear that the horizontal rain was going to hang around for a while, so I got my coat on and continued. I bought some pasta in a garage along the way and continued west to Callanish across some more moorland. Today's cycling has been really nice, a lot of views and a lot of gently undulating moorland roads. In Callanish I stopped to look at the Standing Stones, and in the cafe there I dried out for a bit with hot chocolate and marshmallows and a brownie. Which made my teeth hurt again. I continued north to a village called Shawbost, arriving at the campsite there at about 5.30pm, and the rain stopped! The Nottingham teachers were at the campsite (by the way, their actual names are Rob and Christian), and a retired guy from Scotland was also staying there, cycling around Scotland with no time limit! They were selling fresh fish from a van at the campsite so I bought some cod and boiled it. There was a gas cooker and room with tables and chairs, which was nice to sit in. I ate at the same time as the 3 other cyclists. Rob and Christian stayed in a youth hostel on Berneray last night which is very nice apparently. I also found out that on the first day they'd stayed one campsite further south than me, deciding that North Uist was a bit too far to go. Today was another long day of 95k so I'm happy my knee still isn't complaining! The hot shower was super-nice and I washed my hair for the first time in ages. The nearest shop is 5 miles away and Rob and Christian needed food, so the campsite owner sold them some bacon and eggs from her fridge! I noticed that this island (Harris) feels more developed and touristy, and less isolated compared to the ones further south. Apparently there are many more modern buildings as well but I hadn't noticed that. There is a marathon happening here in 2019 which is being advertised everywhere.

## Day 17
I checked the latest forecast in the morning and it had changed from dry this afternoon to rain! So I made my triple porridge helping and got going. It was 38k to the northern tip of the Hebrides, called the "Butt of Lewis". The lighthouse there is 57m above sea level and was manned full time until 1998 when it was automated. Unlike at the start of the cycle route, there was actually a sign here to take a photo with to end the Hebridean Way! The ride there was undulating across a mixture of moorland and farmland, still with a decent tailwind, it was very nice. I took some photos then started out again in the opposite direction to see if I could get back to Stornoway before the rain came. It was very slow and a bit frustrating having to pedal downhill because of the headwind, but the scenery was nice. After about 2 hours and 25k I passed Rob and Christian - they'd had a lie in (I could hear Rob snoring when I left the campsite), then made bacon and eggs for breakfast, so they set off quite a lot later. There were a few light showers but nothing too bad. The final 20k into Stornoway crossed the island west to east coast across the moors, and climbing uphill into the wind was hard, but nice to get to the top and start going down again! I reached a campsite on the edge of Stornoway before the rain which was nice. It actually stayed dry in Stornoway all afternoon, but further west that wasn't the case, as the other cyclists arrived soaked about 4.5 hours later, they hadn't enjoyed the combination of headwind and rain and were relieved to stay in the bunkhouse at the campsite rather than a tent. After I'd put up my tent I walked 2k into the town centre and was quite hungry. They had the biggest co-op I've ever seen. I abandoned being healthy and started with chips and a bakewell tart from co-op, then a german sausage from a market stall, then fish and chips, then strawberries and raspberries from co-op again for dessert, by which time I was very very full. I had a look in some other shops and asked about buses in tourist information, since I'll have a spare day tomorrow to explore. Back at the campsite the other cyclists invited me to sit in the bunkhouse with them since it was now raining outside, which I enjoyed. I did puzzles for a bit whilst they cooked, then three motorcyclists from Whitby arrived who had just come over on the ferry today. We all talked for a while, one of the motorcyclists buys properties, does work on them, and sells them again as a hobby, and one is a supply teacher. They go about 260 miles a day on their motorbikes, quite a lot compared to my usual 50! Apparently there is a really cheap and really nice cafe in Port Ness near the Butt of Lewis which I missed out on, but perhaps I can visit it tomorrow. I got hungry again and ate three cereal bars, then went to bed.

## Day 18
A day off cycling! I caught the 9am bus from just outside the campsite to Tolsta, along the east coast about 15k north of Stornoway. This is the first time I will have stayed in the same place for two nights so it was quite nice not having to pack up in the morning. I was the only person on the bus by the time it reached the end. From there I started running northwards along the east coast. The first couple of kilometres were on a small road where campervans were parked, I guess it's quite a nice place to stay. The road then turned to a rough gravel track after "the bridge to nowhere" - a bridge built in the early 1900s by an enthusiastic engineer who wanted to continue the road all the way up as a shorter route to Port Ness where I was yesterday. However, although he owned the island, the locals didn't agree with his development plans and the road was never finished. After a bit longer the track ended, leaving miles of moorland on the coastal clifftops. This was such a nice place to run, looking down at the sea from the clifftops, sometimes there were inlets with untouched sandy beaches in them with really clear blue water like what you'd expect to see in the Caribbean. The ground was quite tough to run across, the small path kept appearing and disappearing, but fortunately the heather was relatively shallow so wasn't too bad. After maybe 15k I reached a ruined church, and not far beyond another track started. I decided that it was nicer to follow the clifftops than the slightly inland track, but after a bit more heather I decided that the track was actually quite appealing so I cut back to it and followed it to Port Ness, making it just about a half marathon run in total. I found the previously recommended cafe there, but before going inside I enjoyed a quick swim to cool off! In the cafe I had hot chocolate and two main meals. I had a look around the harbour then caught the bus back to Stornoway the long way round which I'd cycled yesterday. At the bus stop I met a guy originally from Birmingham, but when he retired he moved to Arran, and then shortly after to here. He likes it here and says the people are very kind. I slept for most of the bus journey, then had a shower at the campsite and slept a bit more in the tent. Then I visited the co-op again and made up for yesterday by making some sort of pasta salad involving guacamole, seeds, beans and spinach. It tasted okish, and I have enough for lunch tomorrow too. Whilst eating I ended up sitting with a Danish woman and her son, and their friend from Brixworth, which by coincidence is not far from where I grew up! I noticed there is a lot of Gaelic here, all the signs are in both languages and you hear people actually speaking it in shops and on the bus, it still seems to be a living language on these islands!

## Day 19
The last day of the cycle! The boat left Stornoway at 7am so I set my alarm for 6, but woke up at 5.30 which was lucky because by the time I'd packed up and had breakfast I only just made the boat, arriving at 6.52 as it was preparing to leave! The boat was quite busy so I sat on the floor by the front windows. It was very misty so you couldn't see much, but I discovered that the fog horn sounded about every 2 minutes and 0.5 seconds, and we did then see a few porpoises quite close to the boat. I had a bacon roll as a second breakfast, and slept on the floor for the last half hour. When we arrived in Ullapool it was raining, not as forecast. I cycled and it kept raining. The sign said 57 miles to Inverness where I was headed. The road was a main road was wasn't that busy. It rose up onto the moors, climbing to about 300m, and miraculously as I crossed the high point, the weather transitioned from grey drizzle to sunshine and puffy clouds. The road joined cycle route 1 for the last section into Inverness which was nice. I then had 2.5 hours until my train, so I looked around some more interesting outdoor shops. The train was quite quiet, and had power sockets which was good for charging. I got off at Dyce and it was then another 22k to Templar's Park, where I was headed next to coach orienteering for the week. The cycle was really nice, there is a nicely surfaced disused railway all the way along the Deeside valley from Aberdeen, and it looks like it continues for a long way further than where I went to. So the trip was finished, I enjoyed exploring a part of my own country which I've never seen, enjoyed having my phone off most of the time, and enjoyed doing it by bike where you can get much closer to nature!

{% include leaflet-foot.html %}
