---
layout: post
title: Job Hunting
excerpt: Notes about job hunting
---

In March 2018 I moved from Cambridge to London, leaving a job which I enjoyed a lot. I was contacted by a company in London via LinkedIn, interviewed with them and was offered a job, it sounded quite interesting so I took it. Three months later I left again because it wasn't really what I wanted, and I did a proper job search, applying to about 15 places, having 6 face to face interviews and ending up with 5 job offers to choose from. Here's what I learned from it, and also useful questions to ask in interviews. This is based in London and looking for data science/software engineer roles, I don't know if job searching is the same in other locations or industries!

## Know what you want
Try to find "my ideal job". You probably won't find "my ideal job" but you can get as close as possible.
Here's what I was looking for:

(X) = The job I accepted has it

(?) = I haven't been there long enough to find out

( ) = The job I accepted doesn't have it

* (X) A mixture of maths/algorithms/data science and software engineering
* (X) Project based with a variety of different industries/technologies to work on
* (X) Most of the time spent developing new things, not supporting/monitoring existing systems
* ( ) Use of version control, CI/CD when writing code
* (X) Opportunities to learn from others about algorithms and software
* (X) Opportunities to mentor others / take a lead on things
* (X) Colleagues passionate about what they are making
* (?) Training and conference opportunities
* (X) Not in the finance industry
* (X) Work from home/remotely is acceptable from time to time
* (X) 25 days of holiday and option to take more unpaid
* (X) Flexible working hours, 37.5 hours/week and it *actually* being 37.5 hours, no long evenings culture
* (X) No night shifts / night on call rota
* (?) Travel from time to time but not regularly
* (X) Social contact with other people
* ( ) Company canteen
* ( ) Bike parking and showers
* ( ) Medical/travel insurance benefit

I made a spreadsheet with these things and rated them 1-5 for how much I thought the company matched them, and also gave each once an importance weighting. This gave an overall score for each job offer which helped a bit in deciding.

## Things I learned

* It's really worth searching properly
* Know what you want (see above)
* **Interest trumps salary**. Go for the job which you think you'd enjoy the most day to day, earning more won't make you happier, but doing something you like will. Of 5 offers, I took the lowest salary in exchange for interest and flexibility. That said, the other 4 offers were a help in increasing the lowest offer to something near enough that I felt I could accept without regrets
* Once you know what you want, apply to several places which sound about right
* Update your LinkedIn profile and mark yourself as actively searching for work. I was almost contacted daily by recruiters, and all my interviews except one originated from LinkedIn
* Be honest in interviews about what your strengths/weaknesses are and what you are looking for. If you try to give "the right answer" to get the job, and then you don't like it then it's no good for anybody
* Don't be scared of the interviewers, they are people like you so have a good chat and find out as much as you can about the company, just like they are trying to find out as much as they can about you
* Companies can move very quickly with interviews if they need to. If you have multiple final stage interviews, try to schedule them to be in the same week (or as close together as possible) to avoid keeping anybody waiting too long for a decision
* Be prepared for salary negotiations starting early in the interview process. See the section below
* Most software jobs have a coding test, which usually take a couple of hours
* Ask a lot of questions, it's the only way to find out what the job will really be like!

## Questions to ask
* What do you do day to day?
* What would you expect me to be working on when I arrive?
* How long would I be working on this for before moving onto something else? What might the something else be?
* Which technologies will I be using?
* Do you use version control, CI, CD?
* How many employees does the company have?
* What is the future of the company? What do you think it will be doing in 5 years?
* What's your holiday policy? Is unpaid leave an available option?
* What's the company structure and what level are you looking to employ me at?
* Will I be responsible for taking the lead on anything?
* Will I have opportunities to mentor less experienced people (and be mentored by more experienced ones)?
* What's your policy on working from home / working remotely?
* Do you have a canteen?
* Do you have bike parking and showers?
* (observe, not ask) How enthusiastic do the interviewers seem about their job?
* What opportunities are there for training and conferences? Is it up to me to find training/conferences and ask for budget, or does the whole team normally go as a group?
* Are the hours flexible - can I stay late one day if I want to leave early another?
* Are there any responsibilities outside of working hours, e.g. being on call?
* How easy is it to make changes if I have a sensible suggestion for an improvement to the way things are done?
* For large companyes: how much process/security is there and how much can I just get on with things?
* How much travel is involved?
* What do you find frustrating about your job?
* What do you like about your job? (stronger version: If you were offered 50% more to work elsewhere and declined it, what would be your reasons for declining?)
* How visible will my work be in the real world?
* What are the security rules? Can I discuss my work with colleagues from other teams? Can I discuss my work with friends/family?
* Who will be my manager?
* I will get bored if I work on the same thing for too long. Is that a problem?
* If after a few months I told you that I wasn't finding my work very exciting, what would you say?
* How relevant are the examples on your website to the work you actually do? (website examples may be old)
* Do you have company socials? (both company organised and self-organised e.g. pub after work)
* For startups: how much funding do they have, do they offer shares as part of salary, and do I have to work there for an amount of time before the shares are worth anything to me?

Once you have a job offer
* Why did you offer me the job? (this sounds a bit like compliment fishing, but it is good to know what it was about you that they liked - if you disagree with what they say it means there's been some miscommunication)
* Tell them any doubts about the company to see if they can explain why they're not a problem

## Salary Negotiation
There's a book called [Fearless Salary Negotiation](https://fearlesssalarynegotiation.com/book/), some of which is available for free online, which I found was enough. This [negotiation guide](https://fearlesssalarynegotiation.com/salary-negotiation-guide/) by the author is also quite helpful. It sounds cheesy but it does work quite well.

* Keep a figure to yourself for as long as possible
* The HR interviewer or recruiter is very likely to ask you about salary before you even speak to a technical person. Remember it is their job to negotiate salaries and to get you to say a number, and some of them are very persuasive. Be prepared for the question "what are your salary expectations" in the first phone call and have an answer ready, which ideally doesn't involve a number.
* Aim for 20% above their initial offer, but be satisified with 10%
* Having several offers helps with the negotiation process, but don't enter a bidding war. You can ask a company to match another offer once, but going back and forth looks bad (I didn't do this, but was warned about it)
* If a company makes you a job offer it's because they want you to work there. They aren't going to retract it because of salary negotiations. In fact, they might even promote you in order to offer you a higher salary (this happened for one of my offers)
* It's quite a challenge negotiating over the phone, especially when it's their job to negotiate, and you have a technical background and rarely have to negotiate in your life. Embrace it as a challenge and see what comes of it!
* It appears that companies do actually know what the market rate for a person like you is. All of my final offers ended up being fairly close to each other (not counting bonuses, the highest offer was around 15% more than the lowest offer).
